hi my name is mosh and i'm going to be
your instructor in this java course
in this course you're going to learn
everything you need to get started
programming
in java we'll start off by installing
all the necessary tools to build
java applications then you're going to
learn about the basics of java you'll
learn
how java code gets executed you'll learn
how to build
simple algorithms and throughout this
course i'm going to share with you
lots of tips and shortcuts from my years
of experience i'll teach you how to
write good code like a professional
developer
so by the end of watching this course
you will have a solid foundation in java
and be ready to learn about advanced
java features i've designed this course
for anyone who wants to learn java
if you're a beginner don't worry i'll
make java super simple and hold your
hands through this entire course
you're not too old or too young you will
write your first java program in minutes
my name is mosh i'm a software engineer
with two decades of experience
and i've taught over 3 million people
how to code
and how to become professional software
engineers
i have a coding school at
codegoodmarsh.com where you can find
plenty of courses that help you
take your coding skills to the next
level i hope you stick around and learn
this beautiful
and powerful programming language and
now a word from this video sponsor
as someone who runs an online business i
cannot stress enough the importance of
staying safe online which is why
i was so excited when dashlane reached
out to me if you don't know
dashlane is the password manager and vpn
recommended by apple and google
and it's a fantastic safeguard for
keeping your information secure
it's completely free to use for your
first device so head over to
dashlane.com
to give it a go if you want to upgrade
to the premium to get vpn or
dark web monitoring you can use the
promo code mosh to get 10
off sign up for dashlane today and keep
yourself safe online
now back to the course
in this java tutorial we're going to
download and install the necessary tools
to build java applications so open up
your browser and search for
jdk download jdk
is short for java development kit and
it's basically a software development
environment for
building java applications it has a
compiler
it has a bunch of code that we can reuse
it has a java runtime environment
and a bunch of other stuff so over here
you can see this page on oracle.com
se which is short for java standard
edition
click on this now over here click on
this icon
now on this page you can see java
development kit for various platforms
like linux mac os and windows here i'm
on a mac
so i'm going to download this dmg file
over here
now before we do this first we need to
accept the license agreement
all right now let's download the dmg
when we open this we're going to see
this package let's double click this
and here we see this installation wizard
it's super easy just click continue
and install you have to enter your
computer's password
and then all right done
beautiful so we can move this to trash
now the next piece of software we need
is a code editor there are so many code
editors for building java applications
the popular ones are netbeans eclipse
and
intellij in this java course i'm going
to use intellij
but if you have a favorite editor feel
free to use that to take this course
that's perfectly fine
so let's search for intellij
download all right you can see download
intellij
idea click on this link over here
download the community edition which is
absolutely free and it's more than
enough for this course
so download all right now let's drag and
drop this onto the applications folder
beautiful all right we've installed all
the necessary tools to build java
applications
so next we're going to look at the
anatomy of a java program
in this java tutorial we're going to
look at the anatomy of java programs
the smallest building block in java
programs are functions
a function is a block of code that
performs a task
as a metaphor think of the buttons on
the remote control of your tv
each button performs a task functions in
programming languages are exactly the
same
for example we can have a function for
sending emails to people
we can have a function for converting
someone's weight in pounds to kilograms
we can have a function for validating
user's input and so on
now let's see how we can code a function
in java we start by specifying the
return type of that function
some functions return a value like a
number a daytime and so on
other functions don't return anything so
the return type of these functions
is void void is a reserved keyword in
java and that's why
i've coded that in blue here now after
the return type we have
the name of our function so here we
should give our function a proper
descriptive name like send email this
name
clearly identifies the purpose of this
function okay
now after the name we have a pair of
parentheses
and inside this parenthesis we add the
parameters for this function
we use these parameters to pass values
to our function
for example our send email function
should have parameters like who's the
receiver
what is the subject of this email what
is the content of this email and so on
now in this tutorial we're not going to
worry about parameters we'll look at
them in the future
now after the parenthesis we add a pair
of curly braces
and inside these braces we write the
actual java code
now one thing i want you to pay
attention to here is that in java
we put the left brace on the same line
where we define
our function in other programming
languages like c sharp
it's more conventional to put the left
brace on a new line but we don't do that
in java
so we put the left brace on the same
line where we define our function
now every java program should have at
least one function
and that function is called main so main
is the entry point to our programs
whenever we execute a java program the
main function gets called
and the code inside this function gets
executed okay
now these functions don't exist on their
own they should always belong
to a class so a class is a container
for one or more related functions
basically we use these classes to
organize our code
just like how products are organized in
a supermarket
in a supermarket we have various
sections like vegetables
fruits cleaning products and so on each
section
contains related products by the same
token a class in java
contains related functions now every
java program should have at least
one class that contains the main
function
can you guess the name of that class
it's main
so this is how we define a class in java
we start with a class keyword
then we give our class a proper
descriptive name
and then we add a pair of curly braces
now the functions that we define
in between these curly braces belong to
this class
and more accurately we refer to them as
methods
so a method is a function that is part
of a class
in some programming languages like
python we can have a function
that exists outside of a class so we
call it a function
but when a function belongs to a class
we refer to it as a method of that class
okay now in java all these classes and
methods should have an access modifier
an access modifier is a special keyword
that determines
if other classes and methods in this
program can access
these classes and methods we have
various access modifiers
like public private and so on now most
of the time we use the public access
modifier
so we put that in front of our class and
method declarations
so this is the basic structure of a java
program
at a minimum we have a main class and
inside this main class we have
the main method now you might be curious
why we have a capital m
in the name of this class because in
java we use different conventions for
naming our classes and
our methods to name our classes we use
the pascal
naming convention and that basically
means the first letter of
every word should be uppercase in
contrast to name our method
we use the camel naming convention and
that means the first letter
of every word should be uppercase except
the first word
so that is why we have a capital m in
the name of this class
all right now that you understand the
anatomy of a java program
let's create a new java project and see
all these building blocks in action
in this java tutorial you're going to
learn how to write and execute your
first
java program so let's open intellij idea
here on the home screen let's create a
new project
all right on the left side select java
and make sure
project sdk is not blank so earlier we
downloaded jdk or
java development kit version 12. that is
why
jdk version 12 is selected here if you
don't see that make sure
to select it from this drop-down list
alright now let's click
on next on this page select create
project from template
so we're going to create a command line
application which is an application that
we can run
from the command line it doesn't have a
graphical user interface
or a gui now i know a command line
application is not as exciting as
an application with a graphical user
interface like a mobile app or a desktop
app
but trust me building an application
with a graphical user interface
is very complicated so for now we're
just going to build command line
applications
to learn java properly once you learn
java properly then you can learn about
building
desktop or mobile applications with java
all right
now let's click on next on this page we
have to give our project a name
let's call it hello world now over here
you can see the location of this project
so it's inside the idea projects folder
now right below that you can see the
base package which is set to com
that code with mosh on my machine and
your mission is probably going to become
that package what is this well earlier
we talked about classes and methods i
told you that a class is a container
for related methods so we use classes to
organize our code
by the same token we have a concept
called package
and we use a package to group related
classes
so as our applications grow we're going
to end up with hundreds or even
thousands of classes so we should
properly organize these classes
into packages now by convention the base
package for java project is the domain
name of your company in reverse
so my website is codewithmosh.com that
is why i'm going to set the base package
for this project to come
that code with mosh now it doesn't mean
that you should have an
actual domain registered on the internet
this is just a way to create a namespace
for our classes so now every class that
we create in this project
will belong to this package we're going
to talk about packages in more detail in
the future
so for now just type a base package for
your project
it can become that your name or whatever
it doesn't really matter
all right now let's go forward
all right here's our first java project
now this code editor might look a little
bit intimidating at first but
trust me it's really easy and you're
going to learn about it throughout this
course
on the left side we have the project
panel where we can see
all the folders and files in our project
for example
on the top we have the hello world
project inside this project we have
the source folder where we have the
source code of our project
now in this folder we have another
folder that is com.code with mosh that
is the name of our base package
and in this package we have this class
main
so you can see this main file opened on
the right side here
now look at the name of this file it's
main.java so
all java files should have the java
extension
okay now let's collapse the project
panel by clicking on this icon
that is better so see what we have here
on top of this file we have the package
statement
and this is used to specify what package
this class
belongs to so the main class that we
have here
belongs to this package now this package
statement is terminated by semicolon
so in java wherever we have a statement
we should terminate that statement with
a semicolon
this is exactly like c sharp or c plus
now below this package statement we have
our main class
exactly like what you saw in the
previous tutorial so we have public
class main with a pair of curly braces
inside this class we have our main
method so it's a public method which
means it's accessible from
other parts of this program it's static
we haven't talked about static methods
yet
we'll talk about them in the future for
now just remember that the main method
in your program should
always be static the return type of this
method is void which means this method
is not going to return a value
and here in parenthesis we have one
parameter for this function
we can use these parameters to pass
values to our program again we'll look
at this in the future
now right after this parenthesis you can
see the left brace
and this is where we write the code in
this method
now by default we have this line prefix
with two slashes
this indicates a comment we use these
comments to explain our code to other
people
so these comments don't get executed now
let's remove this comment and
write a bit of code to print something
on the terminal
so here we're going to use the system
class in java
so capital s system here in this tool
tip you can see
the system class is defined in this
package
java.lang or language also look at this
icon on the left side
this indicates a class now inside this
class
we have various members we can use the
dot operator
to see the members defined in the system
class
now the member that we're going to
access is out look at the icon
of this member it's f which is short for
field
we're going to talk about fields in the
future when we talk about classes and
object oriented programming now what is
interesting here
is the type of this field and you can
see that on the right side that is print
stream so print stream is another class
that is defined in java
so once again we use the dot operator to
look at the methods or
members defined in the print stream
class
the method we're going to use is print
ln which is short for line
look at the icon for this method so m
indicates
a method now we press enter
and intellij automatically adds these
parentheses
as well as a semicolon so now with the
code on line six
recalling or executing the print line
method
earlier i told you that inside this
parenthesis we can pass values to our
methods
here we want to print the hello world
message on the terminal so
let's type double quotes and inside this
codes write
hello world so hello world is textual
data
in java whenever we deal with textual
data we should always surround them with
double quotes now we say we have a
string
so a string is a sequence of characters
all right so we're done with our first
program now to execute this
we can click on this icon on the toolbar
look at the shortcut
on mac it's ctrl and r i always prefer
to use shortcuts because they're faster
so ctrl
and r now intellij
is building our application and we can
see the result in this little
terminal window so here's our hello
world message
so that was our first java program next
i'm going to explain
how java code gets executed under the
hood
hey mosh here i just wanted to let you
know that you really don't have to
memorize anything in this course
i've put together a comprehensive cheat
sheet with summary notes that you can
download below this video
so i have done my best to create the
best possible java course
and i would really appreciate it if you
support me by liking and sharing this
video on the social networks that you
use often
also be sure to subscribe and enable the
notifications
so next time i upload a video you'll get
notified thank you so much and
let's continue watching
all right now let's see what exactly
happens under the hood
the moment we run a java program in
intellij
there are basically two steps involved
here compilation and
execution in the compilation step
intellij uses the java compiler to
compile our code into a different format
called
java bytecode this java compiler comes
with the java development kit
that we downloaded at the beginning of
the course let me show you
so here we can right click on this main
the java
and in this context menu we have an item
called
open in terminal it's down below
unfortunately it's not visible in my
recording window
it's called open in terminal on mac and
probably open in command prompt on
windows
so let's open that we get this terminal
window or command prompt on windows
here we're currently inside of this
folder code with mush
that is where we have our main the java
file
now we can invoke the java compiler like
this java c
and pass the name or java file as an
argument so main
to java if you're on mac or linux make
sure to spell this with a capital m
because these operating systems are case
sensitive
so enter now let's look at the content
of this folder
on mac or linux we can type ls on
windows we type
dir so let's take a look
in this folder now we have a new file
main.class
this is the bytecode representation of
this java file
now let me use intellij to run our java
program
this class file gets stored somewhere
else let me show you
so back to the project panel here in our
project
we have this source folder where we have
our source code
and we have this out folder where we
have the result of the compilation
so inside this folder we have production
inside this we have hello world the same
name as our project
inside hello world we have com which is
the name of our top level package
inside this package we have a sub
package that is code with mosh
and here we have our main.class file so
this was the compilation step
now this java byte code that we have in
this file is platform independent and
that means it can run on windows
mac linux or any operating systems that
has a
java runtime environment if we go to
java.com
download we can download java or more
accurately java runtime environment for
various operating systems
this java runtime environment has a
software component called
java virtual machine or jvm
this jvm takes our java byte code and
translates it to the native code for the
underlying operating system
so if you're on a windows machine this
java virtual machine
converts our java byte code into the
native code that windows can understand
this architecture is the reason why java
applications are portable or
platform independent we can write a java
program on a windows machine
and execute it on linux mac or any other
operating systems that have a java
runtime environment
c-sharp and python also have the same
architecture that's why they're platform
independent as well
now let me show you how to invoke this
java virtual machine to run a java
program
so back to this terminal window let me
expand this
currently we are inside of this folder
code with mosh and in this folder we
have
this class file now let's go one level
up
so cd dot dot and one more time
so now we are inside the source folder
we can invoke java virtual machine like
this
we type java and then we type the full
pass
to our main class file what do i mean by
that well
earlier we defined this package com.code
with mosh
and this class the main class is part of
this package
so the full path to this class is
com dot code with mosh dot
main make sure to use a capital m here
because
this is case sensitive now when we press
enter
java will look at this folder com inside
this folder
it will look at this other folder called
with mosh and then it will find
main.class in that folder it will load
the bytecode and
convert it to the native code for the
operating system we are using
so take a look so it executed our
program hello world beautiful
when we run a program using intellij all
these steps are hidden from us
we don't see the compilation or
execution steps
so you have seen java in action now let
me tell you
five interesting facts about java java
was developed by james gosling
in 1995 at sun microsystems which was
later acquired by oracle in 2010.
it was originally called oak after an
oak tree that stood outside gosling's
office
later it was renamed to green and was
finally renamed to java
inspired by java coffee that's why its
logo looks like this
we have four editions of java for
building different kinds of applications
we have java standard edition this is
the core java platform which is what
we're using in this course
it contains all of the libraries that
every java developer must learn
we have java enterprise edition which is
used for building
very large scale and distributed systems
it's built on top of java standard
edition and
provides additional libraries for
building fault tolerant
distributed multitude software we have
java micro edition
which is a subset of java standard
edition designed
for mobile devices so it has libraries
specific to mobile devices
and finally we have java card which is
used in smart cards
the latest version of java is java
standard edition 12
which was released just a few months ago
in march 2019
java has close to 9 million developers
worldwide
currently about 3 billion mobile phones
run java
as well as 120 million tv sets and every
blu-ray player
according to indeed.com the average
salary of a java developer
is just over one hundred thousand
dollars per year in the us
so as you can see java is everywhere
which means more opportunities for you
to get hired
as a professional programmer
now let me give you a quick overview of
how i've structured this course
so you can get the most out of it this
course is the first part of my complete
four part java series each part is about
three to four hours long
so you can easily complete it in a day
or two in the first part which is what
you're watching
you're going to learn the fundamentals
of programming with java
in the next section you'll learn about
the type system in java you will learn
how to work with
various types such as numbers strings
booleans and arrays
by the end of this section you will
build a mortgage calculator as your
first
java project we'll be improving this
calculator
bit by bit throughout this course next
you will learn about
control flow statements that are used to
build algorithms
we'll be talking about various types of
conditional statements and loops
later in this section we'll add data
validation to our mortgage calculator
to force the user to enter valid values
at this point you'll be able to build
basic algorithms and that's great
but being a good programmer requires
knowing how to write good code
code that is clean and expressive that's
what separates an
outstanding programmer from an average
programmer so in the following section i
will talk about
clean coding i will show you various
techniques that professional programmers
use
to make their code clean and
maintainable and finally in the last
section
you will learn how to find and fix
errors in your java programs as well as
how to package them for deployment
so others can use them so the materials
in the first part
will give you a solid foundation on how
to start
programming in java in the second part
we'll talk about
object object-oriented programming which
is a style of programming used
in most if not all java applications
whether you want to use
java to build web mobile or desktop
applications
you need to understand object-oriented
programming well because otherwise
you're going to constantly hit
obstacles in the third part we're going
to talk about core java apis or
application programming interfaces
you'll learn about many of the useful
classes
in the standard java library and finally
in the last part
we'll be looking at the advanced
features in java such as streams
threads database programming and so on
so i hope you're going to join me on
this journey and master
java the most popular programming
language behind
millions of apps and websites
[Music]
in this section we're going to look at
the fundamentals of programming in java
you're going to learn about variables
and constants primitive and reference
types
you're going to learn about casting or
type conversion
you will learn how to work with numbers
strings and arrays
and how to read input from the user once
you learn all this
i'm going to give you a project you're
going to build a mortgage calculator on
your own
so make sure to pay great attention to
all the materials you're going to learn
because you're going to use most of them
in this project are you ready
now let's jump in and get started
in this tutorial we're going to talk
about variables in java
we use variables to temporarily store
data in computer's memory
here is an example imagine in this
program you want to store
someone's age in the memory so we
declare a variable like this
and age equals 30.
so int or integer is the type of this
variable
so in this variable we can only store
integers which are whole numbers
like one two three four numbers that
don't have a decimal point
now in java we have several different
types i'm going to talk about them in
the next tutorial
so first we specify the type of our
variable then we give it a name or a
label
this is also called an identifier
because we use it to identify
our variable this equal sign is called
the assignment operator
and 30 is the initial value that we are
assigning to this variable so we say on
line six
we're initializing this variable which
means we're giving it an initial value
we always have to initialize our
variables before reading them
so with this line we're storing number
30 somewhere in computers memory and
we're assigning this label to that
memory location
now on line 7 instead of printing hello
world we can print
the value of the age variable take a
look so i'm going to run this program
using ctrl and r
there you go now we see 30 on the
terminal beautiful
we can also change the value of our
variable so
after we initialize it perhaps we can
change it to 35.
now when we run this program again
we see 35 beautiful
we can also initialize multiple
variables on the same line
but this is something that i don't
recommend because it makes your code
ugly and hard to read here is an example
we can declare
another variable like temperature and
set it to 20.
so using a comma we can declare multiple
variables on the same line
now even though this is technically
possible it's not something that i
recommend
so it's always better to declare one
variable
on each line like this we can also copy
the value of one variable into another
here is an example let me delete these
variables
and declare a new variable called my age
we set it to 30
and then we declare another variable
like her age
and we set it to my age so now
when we print her age we're going to see
30. take a look
so on line 7 we're copying the value of
this variable into
this other variable now one thing i want
you to pay attention to here
is the convention i have used for naming
our variables
as i told you before this is called the
camelcase notation
so we should capitalize the first letter
of every word
except the first word so in this case
the first word
my it's all in lowercase but the second
word
starts with a capital letter so this is
all about declaring and initializing
variables
in the next tutorial we're going to talk
about various types in java
in this tutorial we're going to talk
basically we have two categories of
types we have primitive types for
storing simple values
and non-primitive types or reference
types for storing complex objects
so in the category of primitive types we
have white which takes
one byte of memory and in one byte we
can store values from 128
to 127. now the more bytes we have
the larger numbers we can store so next
we have short which takes
2 bytes and with this we can store
values up to 32
000. next we have integer which we have
seen before
integers take 4 bytes of memory and
allow us to store values up to 2 billion
then we have long which takes 8 bytes
and with this we can store even larger
numbers
now all these types are for storing
whole numbers that don't have a decimal
point
if you want to store a number that has a
decimal point you have to use
float or double float takes 4 bytes
double takes 8 bytes so obviously with
double we can store larger numbers
next we have char for storing a single
character like abc
and these chart types take 2 bytes so
they support
international letters and finally we
have boolean for storing boolean values
which can be true or false
just like yes or no in english now let's
take a look at a few examples
earlier we used an integer for storing
someone's age but as you learned
integers take 4 bytes and allow us to
store values up to 2 billion
we don't need 4 bytes of memory to store
someone's age
all we need is 1 byte because with 1
byte we can store values up to 127
so i'm going to change this to byte that
is better
now let's look at another example let's
say we want to store
the number of times a youtube video has
been watched
so we define an integer called views
count
note that i'm always using meaningful
names for my variables
because these names help us understand
what this code does
i've seen some people use variable names
like v or
v1 or n nobody knows what these
variables do
so as a best practice always use
meaningful and descriptive names for
your variables
so views count we set this to a large
number like
one two three four five six seven eight
nine
now in java whenever you deal with a
large number like this
you can use an underscore to separate
every three digits
just like how we use a comma in our
documents
to make our numbers more readable we can
use an underscore
in java so with integers we can store
values up to 2 billion
but let's say the number of times this
video has been watched is 3 billion
so i added 3 here now we have a red
underline that indicates an error
when we hover our mouse over it we see
this tooltip integer number
too large so we need to change the type
of this variable to long
however the error is still there what's
going on here
the reason we're getting this error is
that by default java sees these numbers
as
integers so even though we have defined
the type of this variable as long
java compiler sees this value as an
integer and he thinks
this value is too large for an integer
to solve this problem
we need to add an l as a suffix number
we can use an uppercase or
a lowercase l but as you can see a
lowercase l kinda looks like a one
so it's better to use a capital l
so these are examples of whole numbers
now let's declare a variable for storing
a number with a decimal point
so double price we set this to 10
99. obviously the double variable is too
large for storing the price of a product
so we can change this to float that is
better
but we have a compilation error here
take a look
incompatible types required float but
found
double the reason we're seeing this
error is that by default java sees
these numbers with a decimal point as
double
so even though we set the type of this
variable to float
java sees this number as a double so
just like how we added a suffix number
to represent it as a long
we need to add a suffix here to
represent this number as a float and
that suffix is
f once again we can use an uppercase or
lowercase f so these are examples of
numbers
now let's store a character so char
we call it letter and we set it to
a note that we should always surround
single characters with single quotes
and multiple characters or strings with
double quotes
okay so char represents only one
character
string represents a series of characters
and finally let's see an example of a
boolean
so we define a boolean variable called
is eligible is this person eligible for
loan or not
we set this to true or false
these are the boolean values now note
that all these words coded in
orange are reserved keywords in java
just like public static void class
package these are all reserved keywords
so we cannot use these reserved keywords
to name our variables classes and
methods
in the last tutorial you learned that we
use primitive types to store simple
values like
numbers boolean values or single
characters
in contrast we use reference types to
store complex objects
like data objects or mail messages these
are
complex objects now in java we have
eight primitive types that you have seen
before
all the other types are reference types
let me show you an example
so here in this program first i'm going
to declare a primitive type
let's say byte age equals
30. now declaring and initializing a
reference type
is slightly different from a primitive
type let me show you
so let's type date now here in this
tooltip box which is called
intellisense we can see various classes
that have date
in their name so intellij is helping us
complete our code
by suggesting these class names now here
we have a date class
in this package java util so this
package contains a lot of utility
classes that are useful in a lot of
programs
we also have a date class in a different
package java.sql or
sql which is used for programming
databases so this is the benefit of
packages
we can have the same class but in
different packages
they don't conflict so packages create a
namespace for our classes
okay now in this case if we select
the first date class and press enter or
tab
intellij automatically adds this line
for us
import java.util.date
so because currently we are in this
package
in order to use a class from a different
package we need to import it
so here we're importing the date class
in this package
we'll talk about packages in more detail
in the future
so back to our date variable let's give
this variable a name
like now now we set this
here we need to use the new operator to
allocate memory for this variable
and this is one of the differences
between the primitive and reference
types
when declaring primitive types we don't
need to allocate memory
memory is allocated and released by java
runtime environment
but when dealing with reference types we
should always allocate memory now we
don't have to release this memory
java runtime environment will
automatically take care of that
so we use the new operator and then
repeat the name of our class
in this case date and then we add
parentheses
followed by a semicolon in this example
this variable we have defined here
is an instance of the date class so
these classes define
templates or blueprints for creating new
objects new
instances as another example we can have
a class called human
and we can have objects like john bob
mary and so on
so an object is an instance of a class
now these objects or these classes have
members that we can access using the dot
operator so we can type now dot
and these are all the members defined in
this class or in this object
for example we have a method called
gettime
and this returns the time component of
this object this is another difference
between primitive types and reference
types
these primitive types don't have members
so if we type
age dot we don't see anything these
items you see here are not members of
age
they're code snippets which allow us to
quickly generate code
for example we can select 4i and this
automatically generates this block of
code for us
we'll talk about this in the future so
this h variable is a primitive type it's
not an object
it doesn't have any members and that's
why when we use the dot operator we
don't see anything here
now let's delete this line and instead
print the value of this data object
so once again we can type system this is
a class
so we can use the dot operator to access
its members here we have out which is a
field
and the type of this field is print
stream which is
another class in java so once again we
can use a dot operator
and call the print line function now let
me show you a very cool shortcut
instead of typing all this we can use
one of these code snippets
so we type s o u t
and press tab and this generates this
piece of code for us
all right now let's pass our date object
here note that i have not surrounded
this variable with
double quotes because this is a string
and if you run this program we'll see
now on the terminal there you go we
don't want this
you want the value of our data object
not a label
so let's remove the quotes
i run the program again so here's the
current date time
on my machine
i've learned a little bit about the
differences between the primitive and
reference types
so you know that we use primitive types
for storing simple values
and reference types for storing complex
objects but there is a very important
difference between these two categories
of types in terms of
memory management and that's what we're
going to talk about in this tutorial
so i'm going to declare a primitive
variable x and set it to one
and then i'm going to declare another
variable like y
and set it to x so in this example we
have
two different variables x and y and
these two variables are at different
memory locations so they're completely
independent of each other
in other words if i change the value of
x y
is not going to get affected let me show
you so i'm going to update
x to 2 and then print y
so s-o-u-t tab y
let's take a look so run
as you can see y is not affected because
x and y are completely
independent of each other however when
we use a reference time
this behavior is different let's take a
look so
i'm going to delete all the code here
in java we have a point class that is
defined in this package
java.awt so
we press enter and now we have this
import statement on the top beautiful
let's declare a variable like point one
and set it to
new point here we can pass the initial
values for
x and y so i'm going to pass 1
and 1. so intellij automatically adds
these labels x and y now
just like before i'm going to declare
another variable
0.2 and set it to 0.1
and this is where things get interesting
when java runtime environment executes
line 8 first it's going to allocate some
memory
to store this point object let's see the
address of that memory location
is 100 then it's going to allocate
a separate part of the memory and it's
going to attach this label
to that memory location 0.1 in that
memory location it's going to store
the address of our point object so this
is the critical difference
between primitive and reference types
when we declare a primitive variable
like a byte
the value that we assigned to that
variable will be stored in that memory
location
but when we use a reference type like
this point class our variable is going
to hold the
address of that point object in memory
not the actual point
object now look at line nine here we're
copying the value that we have
in this variable into this other
variable so that value as you learn is
not the point
object is the address or the reference
to the point object in memory
that is why we refer to these types as
reference types
because they don't store the actual
values they store a reference to an
object somewhere in the memory so in
this example
point one and point two are referencing
the exact
same point object in memory we only have
one point object
so these two variables are not
independent of each other
they're referencing the same object and
that means
if i update this point object through
either of these variables
the changes will be visible to the other
variable let me show you
so using the first variable point one
we're going to update the value of x
so we use the dot operator and here we
can see
the members of this object x and y are
both fields
which are variables that exist inside of
a class
so we set x just like a regular variable
to a different value
let's say two now because point one and
point two are referencing the exact same
object
if we print point two we're going to see
the change that we just made
take a look so sout tab
let's print point two
and run the program
there you go so the change was visible
so remember this reference types are
copied by the references
whereas primitive types are copied by
their value and these values are
completely
independent of each other
in this tutorial we're going to look at
strings in java so earlier in the course
we printed the hello world message on
the terminal this hello world that we
have here as a string
or more accurately it's a string literal
that means a string value
now let's extract this from here and
store it in a string variable
so cut just before this line
we type string now look this string
class is defined
in java.lang package what is interesting
is that we don't have an import
statement to import this package or
import this class because this package
is automatically imported
so we can use any classes that are
defined in this package
now let's declare a variable called
message
and because this is a reference type we
should instantiate this variable using
the new operator
so new string and here in parenthesis
we type our message hello world however
here we have this little warning take a
look
new string is redundant because in java
there is a shorter way
to initialize string variables let me
show you
so instead of using the new operator we
simply set this to
our string literal now on the surface
this looks like a primitive type because
we are not using the new operator
but this is just a shorthand to
initialize a string variable
strings are reference types in java but
because we use them often there is a
short way to create them
so now let's pass message to the print
line method
and run our program we get the exact
same result as before
beautiful now let's look at a few
interesting things that you can do with
strings
we can concatenate or join a string with
another one
using the plus operator so here we can
combine this with
another string with two exclamation
marks
and here's the result
now because string is a class it has
members that we can access using the dot
operator so we can type message dot
and these are all the methods or
functions defined in the string class
for example we have this method here
ends with and with this we can check to
see if our string
ends with a character or sequence of
characters
for example here we can pass a string to
see if our message
ends with two exclamation marks now
instead of printing the message let's
print
this expression here so let's run the
program
we get true so this method that we have
called here
returns a boolean value which can be
true or false
we also have another method starts with
let's take a look now in this case we
get false because our message doesn't
start
with two exclamation marks another
useful method is length
so we can call that to get the length of
a string which is
the number of characters so
message.length
take a look so in this string we have
13 characters and this is useful in
situations where
you want to check the length of the
input by the user for example you might
have a signup form with a username field
you can check the length of someone's
username and give them an error
if the username is longer than let's say
20 characters
pretty useful we also have another
method that is
index of and this returns the index
of the first occurrence of the character
or the string that we pass here
for example if we pass h the index of h
is zero so let's run the program
there you go we get zero if you pass e
we get one because the index of the
first e
in this message is one now what if you
pass
a character or a string that doesn't
exist in this message
let's say sky
we get negative one so with this method
we can check to see if a string contains
certain characters or words or sentences
and so on
another useful method is replace and
with this we can replace one or more
characters with something else
for example we can replace any
exclamation marks with
let's say a store so this replace method
has two parameters
one is target the other is replacement
and here we're passing two values
for these parameters here's the first
value here's the second value
and we have separated these values using
a comma
now in programming terms we refer to
these values as
arguments a lot of programmers don't
know the difference between
parameters and arguments parameters are
the holes that we define in our methods
arguments are the actual values that we
pass to this method
so in this case target and replacement
are parameters but exclamation mark
and asterisk are arguments now let's run
this program
and see what happens
so our exclamation marks are replaced
with
stars now what is important here is that
this method does not modify
our original string it returns a new
string
so if we print our original string
right after srut tab message
you can see the original string is not
changed because in java
strings are immutable we cannot mutate
them we cannot change them
so any methods that modify a string will
always return
a new string object okay
we also have another useful method to
lowercase let's take a look
so to lower case convert all characters
to lowercase
and once again you can see that the
original string is not affected
because this method returns a new string
okay we also have two upper case
and another useful method is trim
trim and with this we can get rid of
extra white spaces that can be at the
beginning or
the end of a string sometimes our users
type unnecessary spaces in form fields
so using the trim method we can get rid
of these white spaces
let me show you so i'm going to add a
couple of spaces
before and after our message
now when we trim it these white spacers
are going to get removed take a look
so here's the original string you can
see two white spaces at the beginning
and here's our string after trimming
so these are some useful methods in the
string class but this class has more
methods that
we don't have time to cover in this
lecture but as we go through the course
you're going to learn more about the
string class and
other useful classes in java
there are times will include special
characters in our strings
like a tab or a new line or a backslash
or
double quotes so in this tutorial i'm
going to show you how to include these
special characters in your strings
so here we have the string hello mosh
let's say we want to surround mosh
with double quotes now here's the
problem if we add
a double quote here java compiler thinks
this is the termination of our string
so it doesn't understand what we have
after that's why we have a compilation
error
to fix this problem we need to prefix
this double code
with a backslash so using this backslash
we have escaped
the double quote now one more time
let's add backslash double quote here
now let's run the program and see what
we get so we get hello marsh
in double quotes beautiful so double
quote is one of those special characters
that you need to be aware of
another special character is backslash
let's say we want to store the path to a
directory on a windows machine
so that will look like this c drive
backslash
windows backslash whatever
now if you want to store this in a
string we need to escape
each backslash let me show you so
c drive backslash now we have a problem
java compiler thinks
we're escaping the double code here so
it thinks our string is not terminated
with another double code but that's not
what we want you want to add a backslash
here so
we need to prefix our backslash with
another backslash
now we type windows one more time
something let's run the program
so even though we have two backslashes
in our code
we actually see one backslash in a
terminal window
another escape sequence is backslash n
and we use that to add a new line to our
strings
so let's change this to backslash n
and run the program to see what happens
now our string is broken down onto
multiple lines
on the first line we have c drive then
we have windows
so wherever we add a backslash n java
will insert a new line
we can also add a tab in our strings so
if we add backslash t here
there will be a tab between c drive and
windows
let's take a look so c drive
here we have a tab and then windows now
in java we have a few more escape
sequences but quite
honestly they're hardly used so remember
these four
escape sequences that we covered in this
tutorial
in this tutorial we're going to talk
about arrays in java
we use arrays to store a list of items
like a list of numbers or
a list of people or a list of messages
let me show you
so here we have an integer variable we
want to convert this
to an integer array so right after end
we add
square brackets now we have a
compilation error because we're storing
a single number
in this array so to fix this we need to
remove one
because arrays are reference types we
need to use the new operator here
then we repeat the type one more time
into array
and here in square brackets we specify
the size or the length of this array
how many items do we want to include in
this array let's say
five also we should change the name of
this variable from number
to numbers because we're dealing with a
list of items
so always pay attention to the name of
your variables
now we can access individual items in
this array using an index
so we type numbers square brackets
to reference the first element or first
item we use
zero now we can set this to
a value like one similarly we can set
the second item to 2. now what if we use
an invalid index
let's say 10 this array doesn't have 10
items so
let's see what happens numbers of 10 we
set this to
3. let me run this program
we get an exception exceptions are
java's way to report errors
so in this case an exception was raised
and our program crashed
we'll talk about exceptions in detail
later in the course
so now let's remove the last line and
print this array so s-o-u-t tab
numbers let's see what we get
we get this weird string instead of the
items in our array
here's the reason by default when we
print an array
java returns the string which is
calculated based on the address of this
object in memory so if you have another
array and we print that
we're going to see something different
because each object is going to be in a
different memory space okay
now how can we see the actual items in
this array well
we have a class in java called arrays
let me show you arrays so this class is
defined
in java.util package let's press enter
now this is imported on the top
beautiful
so we can use the dot operator to access
the members of this class
here we have a method called to string
now as you see this method is
implemented multiple times
so in the first implementation this
method gets a float array
in the second implementation it takes an
integer array and so on
so for all primitive types as well as
reference types this method is
implemented multiple times
this is what we call method overloading
now we can call this method and pass our
integer array and
this will return the string
representation of this array
so we can cut this from here and pass it
to our print method
like this now let's run the program one
more time
and here's our array beautiful so the
first two items are initialized
the others are set to zero by default
because here we're dealing with an
integer array if we had a boolean array
all items by default get initialized
to false if you have a string array all
items get initialized to an
empty string okay now
this syntax for creating and
initializing an array is a little bit
tedious
and it's an older syntax there is a
newer way
to initialize an array if we know the
items ahead of time
like in this case so i'm going to remove
these two lines
i'm also going to remove the new
operator here we use
curly braces and inside these braces we
add all the items in this array
let's say two three five one and four
now we have five items so the length of
this array is going to be
5. we can read that using the length
field so if we type numbers
dot look here we have this field look at
the icon it's an
f so this is a field which is like a
variable in a class
and the type of this field as an integer
so this returns the number of items in
this array
let's get that and print it using our
print
method like this take a look
so we get 5. now in java arrays have a
fixed size
so once we create them we cannot add or
remove additional items to them
they have a fixed length if you want to
be able to add or remove additional
items from an array
you should use one of the collection
classes that we'll talk about later in
the course
for now all i want you to remember is
that arrays have a fixed
length now currently our array is not
sorted these numbers are
in some kind of random order we can
easily sort this array using the sort
method
of the arrays class let me show you so
i'm going to remove this line
and call arrays dot sort
once again you can see this method is
overloaded because
it's implemented with different
parameter types
so recall this method and pass our
numbers array
now when we run this program we can see
our array is sorted
beautiful
so you have learned that we use arrays
to store a list of objects
in java we can also create
multi-dimensional arrays
for example we can create a
two-dimensional array to store a matrix
or we can create a three-dimensional
array to store data for a cube
these are useful in scientific
computations let me show you
so here we have a single dimensional
array to convert this to a
two-dimensional array
we need to add another pair of square
brackets
now we have a compilation error because
we need to repeat these brackets
on the other side so let's say we want
to create a two by three matrix
so two rows and three columns we add
in other brackets here and change these
lengths to
two and three so now we have two rows
and three columns now to access
individual items in this array
we need to supply two indexes first
the index of the row so we can go to the
first row and then
the first column and initialize that to
1.
now let's print this so srut tab
once again we use our arrays class dot
tostring
and pass this object take a look
once again we get this weird string
because here we're dealing with a
multi-dimensional array
to solve this problem we need to use
another method in this class
called deep tostring we use this for
printing
multi-dimensional arrays take a look
now we have this matrix which has two
rows
and in each row we have three columns we
can also create a three dimensional
array
all we have to do is to add another pair
of brackets
and specify the length of that dimension
pretty easy now what about the curly
brace syntax
let me show you so let's revert this
back
to a two-dimensional array we're going
to get rid of the new operator
and use curly braces
now let's say in this matrix we're going
to have two rows and three columns
so each row is an array itself because
it's a list of items right
so we add another array here
let's say one two three then comma
now we add the second row which is
another array in this row we're gonna
have
three numbers four five and six
now let's remove this line we don't need
it anymore and print this array
so here's the end result
you have learned a lot about variables
you have learned that when declaring
them we need to initialize them
and we can always change their value
later on throughout the lifetime of our
programs
however there are times that we don't
want the value of a variable to change
for example let's declare a variable
called pi
and set it to 3.14 now here we need to
add
an f to represent this as a float
because by default
java compiler sees this number as a
decimal okay
now you know that we use pi to calculate
the area of a circle
what if before we calculate the area of
a circle i come here and type
pi equals 1. then all our calculations
are going to get messed up we don't want
this to happen
that's when we use constants so if we
type
final here java compiler will treat this
as a constant so once we initialize this
we cannot change its value later on you
can see here we have
a compilation error and it says cannot
assign a value to final variable pi
so pi is a final variable or a constant
now by convention we use all capital
letters to name constants
so this should be pi
beautiful now i tell you a little side
story in one of my early courses that i
created years ago that was
c sharp basics for beginners there i
used the same example to teach the
concept of constants but i pronounce
this word as
p instead of pi and believe it or not to
this date people make fun of me
for saying p instead of pi but
that's how we learned this back in iran
we pronounce it as p
and i think greek people also say p but
anyway i just thought to share this
video to change the mood
now we're done with constants next we're
going to talk about
arithmetic expressions
in this tutorial we're going to talk
about arithmetic expressions in java
so in java we have the same arithmetic
operators that we have in math
we have addition subtraction
multiplication
division and modulus which is the
remainder
of a division let's look at a few
examples so i'm going to declare an
integer
called result and here we can type 10
plus
3. now when we print result it's going
to be 13.
pretty straightforward there you go so
this is addition we also have
subtraction multiplication division is
an interesting one let's take a look
so here the result is a whole number
because in java
the division of two whole numbers is a
whole number
if you want to get a floating point
number here you need to convert
these numbers to a float or a double let
me show you
so we prefixed this number
with parentheses and in parenthesis we
type double
now we are casting or converting this
number
to a double similarly we should do that
here
and now we have a compilation error
because on the left side
we declared an integer but here the
result of this expression
is a double and by the way an expression
is a piece of code that produces a value
so what we have here is an expression
because it produces a value
so to fix this problem we need to change
this to double
now when we run this program we get this
floating point number
beautiful so these are the arithmetic
operators
and these numbers that we have here are
called operands
we also have increment and decrement
operators let me show you
so i'm going to declare a new variable
and
x we set it to 1. now if you want to
increase the value of x
by 1 we use the increment operator
now let's print this on the terminal so
we get
two there you go we can apply this
operator as a postfix
or as a prefix and we get the same
result
take a look too however if we use this
on the right side of an assignment
operator
we get different results let me show you
so i'm going to declare
another variable y we set it to x
plus plus in this case because we have
applied the increment operator
as a postfix first the value of x will
get
copied to y so y will be one and
then x will be incremented by one
so if we print x and y
x is going to be 2 and y is going to be
1. take a look
so x is 2 and y is 1. beautiful
however if we apply this as a prefix
first x will be incremented by one so it
will be two
and then it will be copied to y so in
this case both x and y
will be two take a look
so we get two and two now what if you
want to increment
x by more than one let's say by 2
well there are two ways to do this let's
remove y
we don't really need it anymore we can
write x
equals x plus 2. so first
we add 2 to x the result will be 3 and
then 3 will be copied
into x the other way is to use the
augmented or
compound assignment operator so
we can write x plus equals two
what we have on line eight is exactly
identical to what we have
on line seven but as you can see it's
shorter so
this is a better way to write the same
code now this is one of the augmented
assignment operators we have the
augmented assignment operator for
other arithmetic operators so we can
type
x minus equals two and this will reduce
the value of x
by two we also have multiply and
divide so these are the augmented or
compound assignment operators
all right now i've got a question for
you here we have declared this variable
x equals to 10 plus 3 times 2.
what do you think is the result of this
expression
the result is 16. let's run this program
and find out
so run there you go we got 16. but why
well this is a very basic math concept
that unfortunately a lot of people don't
know
in math the multiplication and division
operators have a higher priority
so they get applied first in this
example this expression
3 times 2 is evaluated first the result
is 6
and then 6 is added to 10. that's why we
get 16.
now if you want to change the order of
these operators you can always use
parentheses
for example if you want this expression
to be evaluated first
we wrap it in parenthesis so like this
now java compiler will first evaluate
this expression the result will be 13
and then 13 is multiplied by 2. so we
get 26.
take a look there you go
so be aware of the order of these
operations parentheses
always have the highest priority then we
have
multiplication and division and finally
we have
addition and subtraction
in this tutorial we're going to talk
about casting and type conversion
so i'm going to declare a short variable
called x
and set it to 1 and then i'm going to
declare an integer
called y and set it to x plus
2. in this example we're adding a short
to an integer what do you think the
result is going to be well
let's take a look so srut let's print y
we get 3. that is what you were
expecting
but let me explain what happens under
the hood for this expression
to get executed because we're dealing
with two different types of values
one is a short the other is an integer
one of these values should be converted
to the other type
so they are equal now i got a question
for you how many bytes do we have in a
short variable
we have two bytes how many bytes do we
have in an integer
four bytes so any values that we store
in a short variable
can also be stored in an integer
variable right
so when this piece of code is going to
get executed this is what's going to
happen
first java looks at the value in this
variable
it's one right it's going to allocate
another variable an anonymous variable
somewhere in memory we don't know where
that is we don't know the name of that
variable
it doesn't have a name it's anonymous
that variable is going to be an
integer then java is going to copy the
value of x
into that memory space and then it will
add these two numbers together
this is what we call implicit casting
let me type it here
implicit casting that means automatic
casting or automatic conversion we don't
have to worry about it
whenever we have a value and that value
can be converted to a data type that is
bigger
casting or conversion happens implicitly
or
automatically so byte can be
automatically converted to short
and this can be converted to int and
long okay
now what about floating point numbers
let's look at an example
i'm going to change this to a double 1.1
now here we have a compilation error
because on the right side of the
assignment operator we have
a floating point number a double on the
left side we have an integer
so we need to change this to double now
when we execute this code
we're going to get 3.1 let's verify this
there you go now let's see how casting
happens here
in this case we're dealing with a double
and an integer
an integer is less precise than a double
because in a double we can have digits
after the decimal point
so in this example java is going to
automatically cast
this integer to a double so that will be
2.0 and then 2.0 will be added to
1.1 okay so back to this chain
here we're going to have float and then
double so as a general rule of thumb
implicit casting happens whenever we're
not going to lose
data there is no chance for data loss
now
what if we want y to be an integer so in
this example we don't care about the
digits after the decimal point
you want to see 3 on the terminal how
should we do this
this is where we should explicitly cast
the result
so we should cast x to an integer like
this
parenthesis int
this is explicit casting we convert x
to an integer so the result will be one
without a decimal point
one will be added to two and y will be
three take a look
there you go so this is all about
implicit and
explicit casting now this explicit
casting can only happen between
compatible types so all these types are
compatible because they're all numbers
but we cannot cast a string to a number
in other words
if x was a string like this
let's say one we cannot cast
x to an integer because they are not
compatible
so how do we do this well for all these
primitive types you have learned
you have wrapper classes so in java we
have a class which is a reference type
called integer this class is defined in
java.lang
package and in this class we have
a method called pars int so this method
takes a string
and returns an integer so integer
is the wrapper class for the int
primitive type
we also have short and in this class we
have
parse short so it takes a string and
returns a short
similarly we have float and double
and obviously the name of these methods
are different so here we have
parse float so
back to this example let's say we get x
as a string and we want to convert it to
an integer
this is how we do it integer dot
parse int we pass x here and then add it
to
take a look so we get three
now you might be curious why this
matters why should we parse or convert a
string to a number
to add it to something else well pretty
much in most frameworks
for building user interfaces whether
you're building a desktop or a mobile
application or web application
we always receive input from the user as
a string
so if you have a form with a bunch of
text boxes or
drop down lists almost always we get
values as a strings
so that's why we need to convert these
strings to their numeric representation
okay now what if x is
a floating point number here what will
happen when we try to parse this
as an integer let's take a look
once again we get an exception which is
how
java reports errors to our programs
we're going to talk about exceptions in
detail
in the future so if the user enters
1.1 we cannot use this method instead we
should use
float or double let's say double because
that's easier
double parse double so we parse this
number as a double
at 2 to it and then store the result in
a double
and then we will get 3.1 beautiful
next we're going to look at the math
class for performing mathematical
operations
in this tutorial we're going to look at
the math class for performing
mathematical operations
so in java we have this math class that
is defined in
java.lang package so it's always there
we don't need to explicitly import it
now this class has a number of useful
methods the first method i'm going to
show you is
the round method and with this we can
round a floating point number to a whole
number
so as you can see this method is
overloaded which means it's implemented
twice
in the first implementation it takes a
float and returns an
int in the second implementation it
takes a double
and returns a long so let's pass
1.1 as a float to this method and
store the result in an integer
like this now we print the result
and we get one
beautiful another useful method is seal
or ceiling which returns the smallest
integer that is greater than
or equal to this number so the ceiling
of 1.1
is 2. now here we have a compilation
error because this method returns a
double
but restoring the result in an integer
so here we need to explicitly
cast this to an integer and now
you can see the ceiling of this number
is 2.
we have another useful method that is
floor
so the floor of a number is the largest
integer that is smaller
or equal to this number in this case
it's going to be 1.
let's take a look there you go
another useful method is max which
returns
the greater of two values and once again
this method is overloaded
so in the first implementation we get
two integers we have other
implementations for longs
floats and doubles so let's pass two
integers here
one and two this will return the greater
number which is
2. there you go similar to this we have
min that's pretty straightforward
another useful method is
random for generating a random value
between 0 and 1.
once again we get a compilation error
because this method returns
a double so let's change that to double
now every time we run this program we
get
a different number and this number is a
floating point number between zero to
one
now what if we want a number between
zero to let's say 100 instead of zero to
one
well we simply multiply this by
hundred take a look so every time
we run this we get a different number
between 0 to 100.
now if we don't want these digits after
the decimal point we can either round
this number or
cast it to an integer let me show you so
we can call math.round and pass
the result of this expression so i'm
going to cut this
add parenthesis to call the round method
and then paste
that expression now let's run this code
so every time we get a double we still
have the fraction here
so we can change the type to an int
now we have a compilation error because
the round method returns a long
but here we have declared an integer
this is one of those cases where
implicit casting cannot happen because
we have a value that is represented in
eight bytes of memory
and we want to store that in a variable
that has only four bytes of memory
so implicit casting doesn't work but we
can use explicit casting because we know
the result of this expression
is a number between 0 to 100 so we can
definitely store it
in an integer so let's add in here
now let's run this again there you go
now what if we don't use the round
method here let's see what happens
so i'm going to remove the call to the
round method
and simply apply this casting over here
let's see what we get
now every time we run this program we
get zero do you know why
because here we're applying this casting
to the result
of this method call not this entire
expression
as you saw earlier every time we call
the random method it generates a number
between zero
to one so when we cast that number to an
integer we'll lose the fraction
we always get zero and zero times 100 is
zero to solve this problem we need to
wrap this
entire expression in parenthesis so
we add parenthesis around this and now
when we run this we get an integer
between 0
and 100.
quite often when we work with numbers we
need to format them as currency values
for example we might have a number like
this imagine this is the price of a
product
to display this to the user you want to
add a dollar sign here
and separate every three digits with a
comma
or you might have a number like 0.1 and
we want to represent this as a
percentage value
so instead of 0.1 you want to display 10
so in this tutorial i'm going to show
you how to format numbers in java
we have this class number format that is
defined
in java.txt package in this package we
have a lot of classes for handling text
dates numbers and so on so let's press
enter here
it's important on the top beautiful now
we want to declare a variable
so let's give this variable a name
currency
now we need to instantiate this so new
number
format however we get a compilation
error here
let's take a look number format is
abstract it cannot be instantiated
so in java we have this concept of
abstract classes so some classes are
abstract and they're basically like a
half-baked cake
we cannot use the new operator to create
an instance of them
we're going to talk about abstract
classes and why they exist later in the
course
for now remember that we cannot create
an instance of the number format class
because
it's abstract so there is another way
let me show you
this class has a bunch of methods that
start
with get so we have get currency
instance
and when we call this method this will
create an instance of the number format
class
and return it so instead of using the
new operator we're going to use
this method here this is what we call a
factory method
because it's like a factory it creates
new objects
now look at the return type of this
method it's a number format
object okay so we call this method
now we get the return value and store it
in a variable
of type number format called
currency okay let me temporarily zoom
out so you can see all the code
there you go so on the right side of the
assignment operator we're calling
the get currency instance method we get
the result which is a number format
object and
store it in this variable okay now
i'm going to zoom in so you can see
clearly
all right that's better now this object
has a method for formatting values
once again you can see this method is
overloaded we have multiple
implementations
we can give it a long or a double or
whatever so
i'm going to call this method and pass a
value like
one two three four five six seven point
eight nine one so we have three digits
after decimal and
a few other digits here now this method
will return
a string representation of this number
formatted as a currency
so let's get that stored in a string
variable like
result and then we're going to print
result on the terminal
see what we get so
we get this dollar sign every three
digits are separated using a comma
and we only have two digits after
decimal point
so this class is very handy in
formatting numbers as currencies
we have another method for formatting a
number as a percent
and that is get percent instance
right now it returns an instance of the
number format class
specialized for formatting numbers as a
percent so we need to rename this
variable
from currency to percent now we don't
want to manually change this because
there are multiple references to this
variable
this other reference was not updated so
let me show you the proper way to rename
objects in
intellij if you right click here you can
see
this refactor menu and here we have
rename
now look at the shortcut on the right
side unfortunately it's not visible
in my recording window but on mac is
shift
and f6 i always use shortcuts because
they're faster
so let's press shift and f6
now we get this red box and below this
we can see a few suggestions for
a better name we can choose one of these
or pick our own name
i'm going to change this to percent
and note that as i'm typing this the
other reference gets updated
automatically
so this is very helpful now let's press
enter
okay we're done with renaming now let's
pass a different value here
so let's say we have a number like 0.1
we want to format this as a percent
let's run the program
there you go we get 10 beautiful now let
me show you a cool technique
in this program we don't really need
this percent object because we have used
it in a single place
it would make sense to have this as a
separate variable if we have multiple
references to it
so what can we do here we can completely
get rid of this object
so let's delete this piece of code we're
basically calling this method of the
number format class
as you know this method returns a number
format object
so right after calling this method and
before the semicolon
we can use the dot operator to access
the methods
or members of the number format object
so here we call the format method
straight away and pass our value
this is what we call meta chaining we're
chaining multiple methods together
so here's one method and here's another
method
now this returns a string so we can
store it in this result variable
let me cut this expression from here and
put it over here now we have double
semicolon so i'm going to delete one of
them
all right beautiful
in this tutorial i'm going to show you
how to read input from the user
in java we have this scanner class that
is defined
in java.util package let's import this
and create a scanner object
so new scanner now here inside this
parenthesis
we need to specify where we're going to
read data from are we going to read it
from the terminal window
are we going to read it from a file or
what to work with the terminal window
we type system dot in this is one of the
fields
in the system class a field as i told
you before is like a variable that we
defined in the class
so we have system that in we also have
system.out which we use to print
something on the terminal
right now let's use system.in
and terminate this statement with a
semicolon
now this object has a bunch of methods
for reading data
and all these methods start with next
so we have next byte for reading a byte
we have next line
for reading a line we have nyx boolean
for writing a boolean and so on
so let's call the next byte method and
see what we get
this returns a byte value so we can
store it in a byte
variable let's say someone's age and
then
we print it on a terminal saying u r
plus h so here we're concatenating
a string with a byte and in this
scenario we're going to have
implicit casting or implicit type
conversion
so java will automatically convert this
byte variable here
to a string so they can be added
together okay
now let's run this program and see what
happens so here in the terminal window
we can type 20 enter and it says you're
20.
beautiful but this is pretty boring
let's add a label here and ask the user
to type something
for example before reading data we're
going to call
the print line method and say age colon
now let's run the program so we get this
label here
however whatever we type will appear on
the next
line this is because the print line
method adds a new line
after this label to solve this issue
we call the print method now let's run
the program one more time
we get this pop-up box because our
program hasn't finished execution
so we need to tell intellij that we want
to stop and rerun this program
all right now whatever we type
appears right in front of this label
beautiful
enter you are 20. now what if we type
a floating point number like 20.1
we get an exception because this method
can
only parse byte values if you want to
get a floating point number we need to
call
next float or next double
what if you want to read a string we
don't have next string
we have next and next line let's look at
the differences
so first i'm going to call the next
method here we have a compilation issue
because this method returns a string
i'm going to change this to a string let
me collapse this
that's better we should also rename this
variable so what was the shortcut
shift and f6 now let's rename this to
name
enter beautiful and one last time we
should also
update the label name run the program
so i'm going to type my name here mosh
it says yoramosh beautiful
one more time this time i'm going to
type my full name mash hamadani
but we don't get the last name here's
the reason
these words that we have here these are
called tokens
every time we call the next method it
reads one token
so here we have a space we have two
tokens and we need to call the next
method two times to get the full name
the first time we call it it returns
mosh the second time we call it it
returns
hamidani then we need to combine these
two together this is not ideal
so that's when we use the next line
method with this method we get the
entire line that the user enters no
matter how many spaces or tabs are there
take a look so
hamadani and we get the full name
now what if i type a few spaces before
my name
let's see what happens so those spaces
also appear here
and this looks a little bit odd this is
where we use the trim method remember
with trim we can get rid of all these
white spaces before
or after a string so this next line
method returns a string that we are
storing
in this variable right now just before
storing the result
in this variable here we can use the dot
operator to access
the members of this string object so we
call
the trim method and then store the
result
in this variable once again we're
chaining multiple methods here
let's run the program so
a few spaces mosh haradani and
we get this beautiful output
all right now it's time for a project i
want you to use what you have learned in
a section
and build a mortgage calculator like
this so when we run this program we get
a few questions
the first question is the principal or
the amount of loan we want to get
let's say a hundred thousand dollars the
second question is the annual
interest rate let's say 3.92 percent
and the third question is period in
years let's say we want to get a loan
for 30 years
so this program calculates our monthly
payments and displays it
as a currency this is a great exercise
for you to practice all the materials
you learn in the section
now before we get started i want to give
you a few hints here's the formula for
calculating the mortgage
or the monthly payments i found this
page on wikihow.com
it's called calculate mortgage payments
so let's see how this works
mortgage equals p or principal or the
amount we're going to loan
multiplied by r which is our monthly
interest rate this is very important
so this number that we get here is our
annual interest rate
we need to divide this by 12. also take
into account that this number is
represented as a percent
to calculate the actual interest rate
you need to divide this number
by 100 so in this example the interest
rate is 0.0392
so whatever the user enters divided by
100 and then
divided by 12 to get to the monthly
interest rate
now we have this monthly interest rate
we need to multiply this by this
expression
here we need to add 1 to this interest
rate and
raise it to the power of n where n is
the number of payments
so we need to multiply this number by 12
or 12 months
to calculate the number of payments now
to raise this number
to the power of n you need to use the
power method
of the math class so this math class
has this pow or power method that takes
two arguments or two values
a and b so go ahead and spend 10 to 15
minutes on this exercise
when you're done come back see my
solution
all right let's see what i've done here
and by the way don't worry if your code
is different from mine
we all think and code differently so
it's perfectly fine if your code is
different
just look at my code see what i've done
here and see if there are ways you can
improve your code that's what matters
okay
so here in our main method first i have
declared
two final variables or constants the
first one is months in year which i've
set to 12
and the second one is percent which i've
set to 100. the reason i declared this
constant
is that i didn't want to have magic
numbers in this code
so over here where we calculate the
monthly interest
we get the annual interest and divide it
by percent
and then months in year this code is
very self-explanatory
someone else reading this code will have
no problem understanding what's going on
here
in contrast if you had a magic number
here like divide by 12 and then
4 whatever someone else reading this
code would wonder
what is this 4 doing here what is 12 now
it's quite obvious to you that 12 is the
number of months in a year but trust me
sometimes other people cannot see this
straight away so
as a best practice avoid magic numbers
in your code
always use constants or final variables
to describe them
so let's revert this back all right
so after declaring this constant i have
created this scanner object
here we ask the first question principle
and
we read the answer as an integer i
thought integer is a good data type for
storing the principle because short is
not enough with short we can store
a maximum of thirty two thousand dollars
that's not enough
what if someone wants to find us one
million dollars so it is good and it
allows us to store a value up to two
billion
next we ask the second question annual
interest rate
we read this as a float here i could use
double but the interest rate is a small
number so float is sufficient for that
we don't really need double
so we get the annual interest and then
based on that
we calculate the monthly interest also
see how i have named my variables
all variables have a proper meaningful
names
there are no magic words here like mi as
in short for
monthly interest or m1 or m2
do not use magic names for your
variables always use meaningful
and descriptive names all right
next we get the period we read this as a
byte because the maximum number we want
to support is 30.
so one byte is sufficient to store the
number 30 or
anything smaller now based on the number
of years we calculate
the number of payments note the camel
notation here
i've capitalized the first letter of
every word except
the first word so we get years and
multiplied by
months in here again the code is very
self-explanatory
once we collect all this data then we
calculate the mortgage
so we get a principle multiplied by this
expression
and then divided by this other
expression let's have a quick look here
now this looks a little bit complicated
so if you want to download my source
code
look below this video i've attached it
for you to download
and finally after we calculate the
mortgage we use the number format class
to format this value as a currency
so we get the result store it in this
string
mortgage format and print it over here
now here we could also avoid declaring
this variable and
simply add this expression over here but
i decided to do this to increase the
readability of this code
otherwise this line would be so long but
that's just my personal preference you
don't have to follow this
all right so this was my implementation
of the mortgage calculator
however this program has a number of
problems
the first problem is input validation so
if we run this and
enter a non-numeric value like x y z
our program crashes or as another
example if we enter a negative value
here
our program is not going to behave
properly so that's where conditional
statements come to the rescue
in the next section we're going to talk
about conditional statements you will
learn how to use these statements
to validate the values entered by the
user
so that brings us to the end of this
section i hope you learned a lot and
thank you for watching
so in this section you learn all about
variables and constants you learn about
primitive and reference types
you learn that primitive types store
simple values but reference types hold
references to complex objects that's why
we call them
reference types you also learn about
casting and type conversion
you learn about two types of casting
implicit and explicit
you learn how to work with numbers
strings and arrays
and finally you learned how to read
input from the terminal
i hope you learned a lot and been
enjoying the course so far in the next
section we're going to look at
conditional
statements for controlling the flow of
our programs so i'll see you in the next
[Music]
section hey mosh here
i just want to make a quick announcement
this course you've been watching is
actually the beginning of my complete
java series in this course we only talk
about the basics but in my complete
series
we go way beyond that so if you're
serious about java if you're looking for
a job as a java developer
i highly encourage you to enroll in my
complete java series it's exactly the
same
structure the same quality but it has
way more content
plus you will get a certificate of
compilation that you can add to your
resume
so if you're interested i put the link
down below you can get the course with a
discount
and if you're not happy for any reasons
you can ask for a refund within the
first
30 days so i hope to see you in the
course
this lecture we're going to look at
control flow or controlling the flow of
execution of our programs
we're going to start off by talking
about comparison operators for
comparing values then we're going to
talk about logical operators
like the logical and logical or and
logical not
we use these operators for implementing
real-world rules
and then we're going to talk about three
different types of control flow
statements
we're going to talk about conditional
statements for making decisions in our
programs
then we're going to talk about loops for
executing code repeatedly
and finally we're going to revisit our
mortgage calculator and
add error handling to it so if the user
enters an invalid value
we keep asking them to try again all
right now let's jump in and get started
we're going to start this section by
talking about comparison operators
we use these operators to compare
primitive values
for example are x and y equal or not
so i'm going to declare two integers x
and y now let's compare this to see if
they're equal or not
so first i'm going to add this print
line statement
now to compare these variables we type x
equals
y so here we have two equal signs and
this is the equality operator
don't confuse this with the single equal
sign that we use for assignment
that is the operator used over here okay
so two equal signs represents the
equality operator
now when we run this program we get true
because these values are equal this
expression that we have here is called
a boolean expression so earlier i told
you that an expression
is a piece of code that produces a value
this piece of code produces a boolean
value
true or false that's why we refer to it
as a boolean expression
we also have the inequality operator
so when we run this program we're going
to see false let's take a look
we get false because these two variables
are equal
so the expression x is not equal to y
returns false we also have greater than
greater than or equal to less than
and less than or equal to so if i change
y
to 2 this expression is going to
evaluate to true because
x is less than or equal to y take a look
there you go next we're going to talk
about logical operators
in the last tutorial you learned that a
boolean expression produces a boolean
value
now there are times we want to combine
multiple boolean expressions
let me show you so i'm going to declare
an integer
called temperature and set it to 22.
next we declare a boolean variable is
warm
now we want to check to see if
temperature is greater than 20
and less than 30. so we write a boolean
expression like this
temperature greater than 20. here we
need to use
the and operator so these two ampersands
represent the logical
and operator in java after this we add
our second condition
temperature less than 30.
now if both these conditions are true
the result of this boolean expression is
going to be true
otherwise if at least one of these is
false the result will be false
let's take a look so i'm going to print
is warm
on the terminal
the result is true but if you change the
temperature to
let's say 12.
the result is going to be false and this
is how this works
java will evaluate this expression from
left to right
first it looks at the first condition
the first condition is false because
temperature
is not greater than 20. so because this
expression is false
it doesn't matter what we have after the
and
operator java will ignore the other
expressions
because the and operator will return
true if both conditions are true
okay now let's look at another operator
that is the or operator
so i'm going to delete all this code and
start with a new example
let's declare a boolean has high income
we set it to true and another boolean
has good credit we set this to true as
well
so let's say we're building an
application for processing loans
we want to see if a new applicant is
eligible for a loan or not
so we declare another boolean is
eligible and by the way look at the
names i have used for these variables
they're very meaningful and descriptive
so
here's the rule an applicant is eligible
if they have high income
or good credit if one of these
conditions is true
they are eligible so we write has
high income or so these two vertical
bars represent the or operator
so if they have high income or good
credit then they are eligible so with
the or operator
if at least one condition is true the
result will be true
in this example when java evaluates this
expression
it starts from the left side this
boolean variable is true so it doesn't
matter what we have after
java will not evaluate the rest of this
expression
it simply returns true however if this
variable was false
java would continue evaluating this
expression hoping
that the next boolean value or the next
boolean expression is true
so this is the or operator and finally
we have
the not operator that we use to reverse
a value let me show you how that works
so let's declare another boolean
variable has
criminal record we set this to false
so here's the rule we want to implement
in order for someone to be eligible for
a loan
they should either have high income or
good credit
and they should not have any criminal
records
so let's see how we can implement this
rule we have implemented the first part
they should either have high income or
good credit
now we want to make sure that they don't
have any criminal records
so we need to combine the result of this
expression with this boolean value
using the and operator so first we wrap
this expression in parenthesis then we
apply
the and operator and here we add has
criminal record now we want to make sure
they don't have criminal record and this
is where we use
the not operator so the not operator
will reverse the value
of this boolean variable or expression
in this case
this variable is set to false so when we
apply the not
operator to it the result would be true
so if the first condition
is true and the second condition is true
then that person is eligible for a new
loan
so as you can see these logical
operators are very useful in
implementing real-world rules next we're
going to talk about
if statements
in this tutorial we're going to look at
if statements in java
if statements are extremely important
because they allow us to build programs
that can make decisions
based on certain conditions here's an
example
in this file we have a bunch of
conditions if temperature is greater
than 30
perhaps you want to display two messages
to the user it's a hot day
drink plenty of water otherwise if it's
between 20 and 30
you want to print it's a nice day and
otherwise we want to print
it's a call day so let's see how we can
implement
these rules in a java program back to
our main file
we start by declaring a variable
temperature
we set it to 32. now we use an if
statement
followed by a pair of parentheses inside
this parenthesis we type
a boolean expression or a boolean value
so
let's say temp is greater than 30.
now if this condition is true the
statement that we add after
this if statement will be executed so
let's print
it's a hot day let's run the program
we get this message because temperature
is greater than 30.
now what if we want to print another
message like drink plenty of water
here we should add curly braces to
define a code block
so if this condition is true all the
code that we have
inside of this block will be executed
let's add
another message here drink water
okay so this was our first condition now
let's add the second condition
so after the right brace we type else
if once again we add our parentheses and
inside this parenthesis we type a
boolean expression
if temp is greater than 20 and
it's less than or equal to 30
you want to print a different message
like
beautiful day now here i haven't added
the braces because we have a single
statement
so braces are only required if we have
multiple statements
now this is a little bit controversial
some people believe we should always add
braces
whether we have a single statement or
not other people like myself believe
this creates unnecessary noise in the
code in this tutorial i'm going to add
the braces first
and then remove them so you can see the
difference so let's add
a pair of curly braces here and finally
our last condition
so if none of these two conditions are
true then we want to print a different
message
so here we simply type else we don't
have any more conditions
so let's add a code block and print
called day now let me define a few terms
here we have an if statement and this
statement has
three clauses or three sections here's
the first clause
here's the second clause and here's the
third clause
pay attention to how i have formatted
this if statement
so first we have the if clause the else
if
and else clauses are placed after
these right braces so we have some kind
of hierarchy here
here we have a parent followed by two
children
now let's get rid of these unnecessary
braces and reformat our code to see the
difference
so i'm going to remove the braces for
the else clause
and also one more time here
that's better now we can simplify this
boolean expression
basically we don't need this piece of
code here here's the reason
if the first condition is not true what
does it mean
that means the temperature is less than
or equal to 30.
so this expression here is unnecessary
let's delete this and simplify our code
that's better now look at how this code
is formatted on the top we have if the
else if clause is a little bit
indented but the else clause is not
indented it's at the same level
as the if clause and this looks a little
bit ugly the code is not
symmetrical so if you want to get rid of
the curly braces
a better way to format this code is like
this
so instead of adding the else if or else
clauses
after curly braces we add them on a new
line
now all these clauses are at the same
level
the code is easier to read
in this tutorial i'm going to show you a
very cool technique for simplifying if
statements
so let's start by declaring a variable
called
income and set it to 120
000. now here we can use an underscore
in between these three digits to make
our code more readable
now let's say we want to declare a
boolean variable called
has high income if the income is more
than
one hundred thousand dollars you want to
set this to true otherwise we want to
set this to false
so here we can write an if statement
like this
if income is greater than
100 000 dollars we want to set
has high income to true
however we get a compilation error here
let's take a look
declaration not allowed here so we
cannot declare a variable here
we can only declare variables inside
code blocks
like this code block over here so to
declare this variable
we need to add curly braces to define a
new code block
now we have a different problem this
variable that we have defined
is scoped to this code block so it's
only available here
we cannot access it outside of this
block let me show you
so if we print has
high income you can see we have a
compilation error
cannot resolve symbol has high income
because this variable
is not available outside of the block in
which it's declared
so to solve this problem we can declare
this variable
outside of this block boolean
has high income and then we can simply
set it to true
in this block now we don't need these
braces anymore
so let's simplify the code we add an
else clause otherwise we set has high
income to
false let's remove this print method we
don't need it anymore
so this is one way to implement this
scenario but this code looks very
amateurish
a professional programmer doesn't write
code like this
let's improve it step by step one way to
improve this
is to give this boolean variable an
initial value
for example we can set it to false
initially
and then we implement this condition so
if the income is more than one hundred
thousand dollars
then we set this variable to true with
this we no longer need
this else clause so that was one
improvement
but it's still not ideal in situations
like this we can completely
get rid of this if statement here let me
show you
instead of hard coding false here we
type our expression
income is greater than 100 000
so here we have a boolean expression if
this boolean expression
evaluates to true this boolean variable
is going to be true otherwise it's going
to be false
so this is the simplest the most elegant
and the most professional way to
implement this scenario now one more
improvement before we finish this
tutorial
i personally prefer to wrap this
expression in parenthesis
even though technically we don't need
parentheses here but these parentheses
make our code more clear more readable
let me show you
so i'm going to wrap this inside this
parenthesis
now it's very clear very obvious that on
the right side of this assignment
operator we have
a boolean expression
in this tutorial we're going to look at
the ternary operator in java
so we're going to continue with the
example from the last tutorial
we have this income variable imagine
this is the income of our customers
now depending on their income we want to
put these customers in different classes
if their income is more than one hundred
thousand dollars you want to put them in
the first class
otherwise we want to put them in the
economy class so
here's one way to implement the scenario
we declare this string variable
class name note that we cannot call this
class because class is a reserved
keyword
so class name now we write our first
condition
if income is greater than one hundred
thousand dollars
we set class name to first
otherwise we set it to economy
now as you learned in the last tutorial
this code looks very amateurish a
professional programmer doesn't write
code like this
so one way to simplify this is to give
this variable an
initial value so we assume they are
in the economy class and then we check
this condition
if this condition is true we put them in
the first class so with this we can get
rid of this
else clause that is better now in the
last tutorial
i showed you how to simplify this even
further but the technique you learned
there
cannot be used here in other words we
cannot add
income greater than 100 000
here because here we have a boolean
expression
but on the left side we have declared a
string variable
so we want to set this to a different
string depending on the result of this
expression
and this is where we use the ternary
operator so we start
with our condition then we type a
question mark
if this condition is true we add
this value here otherwise we add
the other value so this question mark
and colon is the ternary operator in
java
it has three pieces first we have a
condition
if this condition is true this value
will be returned and assigned
to our class name variable otherwise
this other value will be returned
now we can completely get rid of this if
statement
so put the ternary operator in your
toolbox it's very helpful
next we're going to look at switch
statements in java
in this tutorial we're going to look at
switch statements in java
we use three statements to execute
different parts of code depending on the
value of an expression
kind of similar to if statements let me
show you so let's say we're going to
write a program
and check the role of the current user
and then we're going to print different
messages
or give them different features
depending on the role
so let's declare a string variable
called role and here we set this to
admin
now to check the role of the user we can
write an if statement like this
if role equals admin
then perhaps you want to print you are
an admin
now you might be wondering why we have
this condition here it's obvious that
this condition
is always true because we have set role
to admin
but this is just for demonstration in a
real program we are not gonna hard code
this admin here so we're gonna read the
role of the current user
from somewhere else we don't know what
it is at the time of writing code
okay so here we have one condition let's
write
another condition else if role equals
moderator perhaps we want to display a
different message
so you are a moderator
and finally if the role is none of these
values you want to print
you are a guest so this is one way to
implement
this scenario using an if statement we
can also implement this using a switch
statement and
sometimes that looks a little bit
cleaner let me show you
so we start with a switch statement
then we add parentheses and inside this
parenthesis we add
our variable in this case row next we
define
a block of code and in this block we add
one or more case clauses
so we have a case for an admin we had a
colon here
now what do we want to do here if the
role is admin you want to print
you are an admin so i'm going to copy
this line from here
and then paste it over here now after
this line we need to add
a brick statement to jump out of this
switch block
okay then we add another case class so
case
moderator once again we have a colon
and here we're going to print this other
message
so we paste it here and then we're going
to break
now optionally we can have a default
clause here
so if none of these previous cases apply
the code that we write in this section
will be executed
so here we want to print you are a guest
now here we don't need to use a brick
statement because we're at the end of
the switch block
so we'll automatically jump out of this
block
in contrast if we didn't use this break
statement here
java will continue executing these other
lines here so if the role is admin
first it will execute this line and then
it will jump to this case block
it will execute this other line and then
after it executes this break statement
it will jump out of the switch block
okay so this is how we use a switch
statement
now compare this with the if statement
some people prefer to use if statements
others prefer to use
a sweet statement now one more thing
before i finish this tutorial
here we're comparing the value of roll
with strings but we could also use
integers other than the long
type so if roll was a byte a short or an
integer our cases would look like this
case 1
case 2 and so on
now here we have a compilation error
because roll is a string
let's change this to an integer
and we can initialize this to one so as
you can see
with sweet statements we can execute
different code depending on the value of
an expression
all right now it's time for an exercise
this exercise i'm going to give you is a
popular
interview question so i want you to
write a program that behaves like this
here we should enter a number if this
number is divisible by
5 we get fizz so
if you run the program again and enter
once again we get fit now if this number
is divisible by 3
we get buzz if this number is divisible
by both
5 and 3 like 15 or 30 or whatever
we get fizz buzz and if this number is
not divisible by 5 or 3
like 2 we get the same number
printed on the terminal so go ahead and
spend five to ten minutes on this
exercise you will see my solution next
all right to read the number first we
need to use the scanner object
so scanner we import this
and instantiate it and as you know here
we need to pass system.in
to read data from the terminal now we
print a message
so we're going to use the print method
instead of print line
here we add a label like number and then
we call scanner the next end to read
a number we store it in this variable
number
okay so the first part is done now we
need to check to see if this number is
divisible by 5 or not
so we can write an if statement like
this if number
here we use the modulus operator which
returns the remainder of a division
so we divide this by five and if the
remainder
equals zero that means this number is
divisible by five
so we print fizz
now otherwise
if this number is divisible by three
we print buzz
we need another condition if this number
is
divisible by five and
three so here we use the and operator
number divisible by three equals zero
in this case we want to print fizz buzz
otherwise we want to print the same
number
like this now this is not the right
solution as i will show you in a second
this program has a book
but it's a very common solution that i
see amongst my students
so let's run this program and see what
is wrong here
all right here we enter five we get fizz
beautiful
what if we enter 10. 10 is also
divisible by 5
so we get 5. so far so good what about
a number that is divisible by 3 we get
buzz
good what if we enter a number that is
divisible by both 5
and 3 like 15. we get fizz again
why is that here's the reason with this
implementation
if we enter 15 this first condition
will evaluate to true so we get fiz
these other else clauses will be ignored
and that is why
this line will not be executed so in
situations like this you should have
the most specific conditions on the top
and the most generic ones on the bottom
in this case we want to move
this condition to the top so if the
number is divisible by
five and three we're going to print
fizzbuzz so this is very specific
otherwise if the number is only
divisible by 5
we print fizz else if it's divisible by
3 we print
buzz and finally if none of its
conditions
is true then we print the same number
now let's run the program one more time
so we enter 15 and we get fizz boss
beautiful so here's one way to solve
this problem now i have seen some people
argue
that we have repeated this expression
twice number is divisible by five we
have that here on line 12
as well as line 14. in programming we
have this concept called dry which is
short for
don't repeat yourself so some people
argue that here we have repeated this
expression and this is not a good
solution
here's another way let me show you so
we're going to get rid of this second
condition here instead we're going to
add a
code block over here so if the number is
divisible by five
first we check to see if the number is
also divisible
by three if that's the case we print
fizzbuzz otherwise we print
just fizz like this okay
now we no longer need these two lines
because we already implemented this
concept here
so first we check to see if the number
is divisible by five
if not we check to see if it's divisible
by three and otherwise
so here's another way to solve this
problem but in my opinion this approach
is kind of amateurish and ugly because
these nested
if-else statements are considered a bad
practice
now this is not terribly bad but the
more you nest these
if else statements the more confusing
your code is going to be to other people
so i personally prefer the previous
solution even though we had a bit of
repetition in the code
the more you program the more you build
software the more you realize that there
is no way
to build ideal software programming and
problem solving is all about trade-offs
every solution has certain strengths and
certain weaknesses
this solution doesn't have any
repetition or duplication in the code
but it has a nested structure and these
nested structures
make our code hard to read and
understand
the previous solution had a bit of
repetition but it had a flat structure
there is no nesting here and this code
is cleaner and
easier to read
there are times that we want to repeat
one or more statements
for example let's say we have this hello
world
message here let's say we're going to
print this five times on the terminal
we don't want to repeat this code like
this this looks very ugly
that's where we use loops in java we
have a few different types of loops
the first one that i'm going to talk
about in this tutorial is for loops
so let's see how we can use a for loop
here i'm going to delete all this code
you start by typing the four keyword
followed by parentheses
and inside this parenthesis we need to
do three things
first we need to declare a loop or a
counter variable
so let's declare a variable called i and
initialize it to zero quite often we use
variable names like i
j and k for loop counters
next we add a semicolon to terminate the
first statement
then we write a boolean expression that
determines how many times
this loop is going to get executed so i
less than 5 as long as i is less than 5
this loop will be executed once again we
add
a semicolon and finally we increment i
by 1 like this so this is the basic
structure for a for loop
now here we can repeat one or more
statements using this for loop
so we can add our hello world message
here
now here we have a single statement so
we don't need braces
but if you have multiple statements that
we want to repeat we need to define
a code block here now i'm going to
remove this because
we don't really need them so let's run
this code and see what we get
you get hello world printed five times
on the terminal beautiful
now let me explain how this code gets
executed when java sees this for loop
first it will execute this statement
so here we are initializing i to 0. then
java evaluates this condition is this
condition true
obviously it is because zero is less
than five so the control moves
to line seven this line gets executed
now at the end of this iteration or at
the end of this loop
the control moves here so i is
incremented by one
now we're at the beginning of the second
iteration once again
this condition is evaluated is one less
than five
obviously it is so once again the body
of this loop gets executed
now fast forward at the end of the fifth
iteration
i will become five five is not less than
five
so the loop condition will be false and
control moves
outside of this for loop now here's one
thing you need to remember if you want
to execute something five times
you can initialize your loop counter or
loop variable to zero
and use the less than operator here
another way
is to initialize this to one and then
use the less than or
equal to operator here now to make this
more interesting
let's print i over here so here we add a
space and then
concatenate this string with i take a
look
so we get hello world one two three four
five
in contrast if we initialize i to 0
and use the less than operator
we would get hello world 0 1 2 3 4.
we can also print these numbers in
reverse order so
we initialize i to five and
execute this loop as long as i is
greater than
zero but here instead of incrementing i
we decrement it now
we get hello world five four three two
one so this is all about
four loops next we're going to look at
while loops
in this tutorial we're going to talk
about while loops in java
while loops are very similar to for
loops in terms of their functionality
but they're different in terms of syntax
let me show you so we're going to
continue with the example from the last
tutorial
i'm going to rewrite this code using a
while loop
so first we declare a loop variable
and i we initialize it to zero next we
type
while and here in parenthesis we type
our loop condition
while i is greater than zero then we're
going to execute the code
inside this block so i'm going to copy
this from here
paste it in this block and finally we
need to decrement
i like this so
at the end of each iteration we
decrement i just like our for loops
so as you can see we can achieve the
same thing using a for loop or
a while loop however the implementation
using the for loop
is a little bit lighter and cleaner so
in situations where
you know ahead of time how many times
you want to execute
one or more statements it's better to
use a for loop
while loops are better in situations
where we don't know exactly
how many times we want to repeat
something for example let's say we're
going to write a program
and ask the user to continuously enter
something
until they type quit the moment they
type quit we're going to terminate the
program
in that situation we don't know how many
times the user is going to enter
something
so let's write that program using a
while loop i'm going to delete
everything from here
all right we're going to start with our
while loop now what is our loop
condition here
we don't have a counter variable in this
example instead we want to check
to see if the user entered quit or not
so here we can declare a string called
input and initialize it to an empty
string
then we can write a while loop like this
while input does not equal to quit
now this code is not going to work
because input is a string which is a
reference type
and we cannot use comparison operators
between reference types
because these operators will compare the
address of our string objects
not their value so if you have two
strings quit and quit
but stored in different memory locations
they have different addresses
so we can use the inequality operator to
compare their value
instead we need to use the equals method
of string objects so we want to check to
see if the input
equals quit now here we need to apply
the not
operator so as long as the input does
not equal quit we're going to
continuously ask the user to enter
something
so here we can print a label like
input and then we can use a scanner
object
to read something from the terminal so
let's create a scanner object
and instantiate it using system.in
and then call scanner.next this will
return
a string so we can store it in this
input variable
now with this implementation in every
iteration we're going to create
a new scanner object so if the user
enters 10 numbers
we're going to create 10 scanner objects
in memory this is
unnecessary and it's actually bad
practice because it's going to pollute
our memory
so it's better to create the scanner
object outside
of our while loop and then simply use it
here
also here we're assuming that the user
is typing everything in lowercase
so if they type quit in uppercase or any
combinations of
lowercase and uppercase characters this
logic
is not going to work the way we want so
over here right after reading something
from the terminal
we're going to call the two lowercase
method of string objects
to convert it to lowercase now to make
this program more interesting
let's echo back whatever the user enters
so
we simply print that on the terminal
now let's run this and see what happens
so i'm going to enter a few numbers like
one two and three
whatever we type gets a code back but
the moment we type quit
our program so while loops are useful in
situations where
we don't know ahead of time how many
times we want to repeat something
in java we have another type of loop
called a do-while loop
it's very similar to a while loop but it
gets executed at least
once let me show you what i mean so i'm
going to rewrite the same code using a
do-while loop
we start with a do keyword then we
create
a code block at the end of this code
block
we type while followed by our loop
condition
so not input dot equals
quit and then we terminate this using a
semicolon now
inside the body of this loop we'll
simply copy all these lines we have here
now compare these two types of loops
with while loops
we check the condition first so if the
condition is false the first time
this loop will never get executed in
contrast
we do while loops we check the condition
last
so do while loops always get executed at
least
once even if the condition is false that
is the only difference
in reality most of the time we use while
loops do while loops are rarely used but
there are certain cases for them
so just be aware of them but most of the
time prefer to use while loops
we're going to continue with the example
from the last tutorial
this program we have written has a tiny
problem let me show you
so i'm going to run this enter a couple
numbers
these numbers get echo back beautiful if
we type quit
the program terminates but the word quit
also gets echoed back
this is a bit weird so let's look at a
couple ideas for solving this problem
back to our code one way to solve this
problem is to check the input
before printing it so here we can type
an if statement if the input does not
equal
quit then we print it so
not equal input dot equals
quit if this condition is true then
we're going to print the input let's
take a look
so one two quit
beautiful we solve the problem there is
another way to solve this problem as
well
let me show you we can reverse this
condition
so if the user types quit we can
immediately jump out of the loop
using the break statement so i'm going
to remove the not
operator if the user types quit
we're going to break out of the loop
otherwise
we're going to continue execution and
print this input on the terminal
so when java sees the break statement it
will ignore everything else after
and it will terminate the loop let's run
the program
once again we enter a couple numbers
followed by quit
beautiful so this is the break statement
we also have the continuous statement
that moves control to the beginning of a
loop
let me show you so let's imagine if the
user types
pass we don't want to echo that but also
we don't want to terminate the loop
you want to ask the user to try one more
time so after we read the input
we can check to see if input equals
pass this is where we use the continuous
statement
when java sees this it will move control
to the beginning of the loop
so all these other statements are going
to get ignored and what the user types
is not going to get printed on the
terminal let's run the program and see
this in action
so we type 1 2 pass
it doesn't get a code back one more time
and finally quit
so to recap the brick statement
terminates a loop
and the continue statement moves control
to the beginning of a loop
now one last thing before we finish this
tutorial in this implementation we don't
really need
this loop condition because the moment
user types
quit this break statement is going to
kick in and terminate the loop
so we can simplify this code by using
a true as our loop condition
so this is always true and this loop is
going to get executed forever
until the user types quit this is a very
common technique that you see amongst
professional programmers just remember
if you're using this technique
make sure to have a break statement
otherwise you will end up with an
infinite loop that executes forever it
never terminates
and that can be very dangerous in terms
of memory consumption
so if you're using while true make sure
you have a break statement in your loop
the last type of loop we want to look at
is the for each loop in java
we use for each loops to iterate over
arrays or collections
let me show you so i'm going to start by
declaring a string array
called fruit and we initialize this with
three items let's say apple mango
and orange
now let's say we want to iterate over
this array and print each item on the
terminal
we can use any of the loops you learned
about earlier like a for loop or a while
loop
but we can also use the for each loop
which is a bit easier let me show you
first i'm going to use the for loop to
iterate over this array
so we type four here we declare our loop
variable or
loop counter into i we set it to zero
as long as i is less than fruits that
length
we're going to increment i by one after
each iteration
and here we simply print fruits of
i let's run the program and see what we
get
so we get each item on a new line
beautiful
now there is another way to write the
same code using the for each loop
here we type four in parenthesis
particularly
a loop variable but the type of this
variable should be based
on the type of items in our array so
here we have a string array and that
means
every item in this array is a string so
here we should declare
a string variable we call it fruit
here we type a colon and then the name
of our array
fruits now in each iteration
fruit will hold the value of one item in
this array
so here we don't have to declare a
numeric counter we don't have to write
a boolean expression like this we don't
have to increment our counter
it's much easier to iterate over an
array now
if we print fruit we get the exact same
result as before
take a look so the first three items are
from our for loop and here's the result
of our four each loop
so this is the four-ish loop however
this force loop has a couple of
limitations
one limitation is that it's always
forward only so we cannot iterate over
this array
from the end to the beginning in
contrast we can easily do this
with a for loop so here we can
initialize i
to fruit the length then we change this
operator
to greater than and replace this value
with zero
so as long as i is greater than zero
we're going to decrement
i the second limitation of the forage
loop is that
here we don't have access to the index
of each item
all we have is this loop variable which
holds
the value of each item in this array
in contrast in our for loops we can
access both the
index and the actual item so i
represents the index of each item
and fruits of i returns the item at the
given index
so if you need the index then you will
have to use the for loop
otherwise it's much easier to use the
for each loop
all right now let's get back to our
mortgage calculator and implement some
basic error handling
so here i've changed this question by
adding this label that identifies the
range of values we can enter
so the minimum amount of loan we can get
is one thousand dollars and maximum
is one million dollars so if i enter one
here
i get this message enter a number
between 1 000 and 1 million
and now we are asked this question one
more time if i keep
entering invalid values i get asked the
same question
now let's enter a valid value like 1
million dollars next we need to enter
the annual interest rate now here we
need to enter a value that is greater
than 0
and less than or equal to 30. so if i
enter 0
we get this message enter a value
greater than 0 and less than or
equal to 30. once again we're asked this
question one more time
so let's enter a valid value like 3.92
here we need to enter a value between 1
and 30. so if we enter
0 we get an error message and we're
asked the same question
so let's enter 30 and finally we get the
result
here's our mortgage or monthly payments
so go ahead and spend 5 to 10 minutes on
extending this mortgage calculator
by adding error handling to it you'll
see my solution next
all right let me show you how i'm going
to solve this problem step by step
so for each question we want to validate
the value that the user enters
if the value is invalid you want to keep
asking the same question
so this is where we can use an infinite
loop let me show you so
here's our first question principle i'm
going to wrap
these two lines inside an infinite loop
while true so we're going to keep asking
the same question
until the user enters a valid value
so here after we read the principle we
can write an if statement like this
if principal is greater than or equal to
and it is less than or equal to 1
million and here we can use an
underscore to separate
these digits to make our code more
readable so if the user enters a valid
value
then we can break out of this infinite
loop
otherwise we're going to print an error
message so
enter a value between
1000 and 1 million
like this okay now if you look on the
right side here you can see this red bar
this indicates an error and here in this
preview window you can see exactly where
we have an error it's down below on line
30 where we calculate the mortgage
so if you click on this red bar
we jump over here principle is
highlighted in red so here we have a
compilation error
cannot resolve symbol principle here's
the reason because
we've wrapped these few lines inside
this while loop
and earlier i told you that whenever you
declare a variable
that variable is scoped to the block in
which it's defined
so this is where we have declared the
principal variable and
it's scoped to this block it's not
available
outside of this block that's why we get
this compilation error
so to solve this problem we need to
declare this outside
of this while loop we can do it right
here after
we declare our constants so let's say
int
principle and we can initialize it to
zero now we remove
the declaration from here and the error
is gone
now we need to repeat the same pattern
with other questions
so real quick here's our second question
where we read the annual interest
once again we add an infinite loop
now the moment we read the annual
interest we validate the data
so if annual interest is greater than or
equal to let's say 1
and it is less than or equal to 30
then we're going to break out of this
infinite loop now here we should also
calculate the monthly interest
so the proper way to do this is like
this
if the user enters a valid value we add
a code block here
first we calculate the monthly interest
and then break out of the loop otherwise
we print an error message enter a value
between 1 and 30.
okay now if you look to the right side
again we have
two compilation errors monthly interest
is not resolved
because we have declared it inside of
this block
so let's move the declaration to the top
here we remove the float keyword
and declare monthly interest
over here that's better
and finally for the last question one
more time
we need to wrap it in this infinite loop
this is where we read the number of
years and right after this line we need
to do our data validation
so if years is greater than or equal to
and it's less than or equal to 30.
here we add the code block this is where
we calculate the number of payments
and then we break actually i forgot to
type an s here
otherwise if the user enters an invalid
value we simply print an error message
enter a value between 1 and 30.
now here once again we have a
compilation error because number of
payments cannot be resolved
so we remove the declaration from here
and moving to the top
right here number of payments
so this is how we add data validation to
this program the problem is that this
code
the code inside the main method is now
getting a little bit too long
and this hurts the maintainability of
our program
someone else reading this code they have
to look at all these statements to
figure out what's going on
this is where we need to break this code
down into
smaller easier to read and easier to
understand chunks
and that's what i'm going to show you
next
so in this section you learn how to
control the flow of execution of your
programs
we started off by talking about the
comparison operators for
comparing primitive values then we
talked about the logical operators like
and or and not i showed you how we can
use these operators for
implementing real-world rules and then
we talked about
three types of control flow statements
you learn about
conditional statements like if and
switch for making decisions
in our programs then you learned about
loops for executing code repeatedly
we looked at four types of loops four
loops while loops
two while loops and four each loops and
finally we looked at the break and
continue statements for
breaking or jumping to the beginning of
a loop
i hope you learned a lot and been
enjoying the course so far
[Music]
as martin fowler said any fool can write
code that a computer can understand
good programmers write code that humans
can understand
i can't agree more if you have seen any
of my courses
you probably know that i put a lot of
emphasis on writing clean code
so i have dedicated this entire section
on clean coding
we're going to continue extending our
mortgage calculator and add new features
to it along the way
you will see our code starts to get
messy and hard to maintain
so i will show you a few techniques for
changing the structure of the code
and make it clean and beautiful are you
ready
let's jump in and get started
hey guys mosh here i want to
congratulate you on your determination
for
learning i would really appreciate it if
you support me by liking and sharing
this video
also subscribe to my channel and enable
notifications so
next time i upload a video you get
notified now if you want to learn more
i would encourage you to enroll in my
ultimate java series
as i told you earlier this youtube
tutorial is the first two hours of this
series
if you're serious about learning java
and want to become a professional job of
developer
i highly encourage you to enroll in this
series in case you're interested i put
the link down below in the description
box
thank you and have a fantastic day
[Music]